[Music]
for this video we're gonna follow along
the conservation process of an
oil-on-canvas by the American artist
Henry Ranger and upon first glance this
appears to be a fairly tonal seascape
but that's not exactly the case and I
want to jump right into the cleaning
process because that's going to be the
most exciting and arguably a most
interesting part of this whole
conservation now this was an
oil-on-canvas that was glued down to a
piece of hardboard like masonite at some
point in the past and it was likely done
because of some small damage and I'll
deal with that if I find it and later on
but really what's exciting about this
painting is just how dirty it is there
is so much surface grime and so much old
varnish on this painting that as I start
to clean it we can see that this isn't a
tonal painting at all
this painting is full of color full of
life full of delicate beautiful
brushwork that's just completely
obscured by this thick heavy darkened
varnish layer and so you can see just
with a couple of square inches cleaned
this is a totally different painting now
this is a lot of old natural resin and
old natural resin darkens with exposure
to oxygen and ultraviolet light it
degrades over time and when it does it
turns yellow or brown or gray or cloudy
or cracked and in this case this
painting has so much varnish on it that
it's almost like looking through a piece
of tinted glass and so as we remove this
varnish we can really get an idea of
what Ranger wanted us to see what he saw
when he painted the picture now as I'm
cleaning this and as I'm removing all of
this old varnish I'm also noticing that
there are a lot of areas of over paint
and you can start to see them come
through and those are areas that are
unnaturally dark on the sky there's an
area right above my hand right there and
on the left hand side of this painting
there is a massive amount of over paint
now generally over paint like this is
done by an inexperienced conservator or
just somebody who doesn't know any
better
and usually it's excessive
and totally unnecessary and needs to be
removed but I'm just kind of shocked at
how much over paint is on this painting
I mean if you look at that left-hand
side just to the left of the boats
there's a good eight or nine inches by
three or four inches that is completely
solidly over painted now that is there's
a new layer of oil paint that's resting
atop the original paint and that's
really problematic not only because it
betrays the artists original intent and
it's not original to the painting but
because in this case it's the totally
wrong color now I suspect that whomever
did this retouching whoever did this
over painting probably didn't clean the
painting before doing it and so they
matched their over paint to a dirty
painting and so naturally when I removed
the old varnish they're over paint which
was largely concealed when the painting
was dirty becomes crystal clear and
that's a really big problem because it
looks lousy as I go along I'm starting
to find more areas I just revealed one
right there that are gonna need to be
removed and my guess is that there was
paint loss or maybe a small tear or a
small hole in those spots and I'll have
to deal with those later but first I've
got to get all of this stuff off so I'm
gonna go ahead and continue cleaning and
I'm gonna step back and maybe I'll throw
some music on and let you guys enjoy
this process without me rambling on so
sit tight I'll be back in a little bit
[Music]
you
Oh
[Music]
you
and so as we come to the end of the
cleaning process we can see just how
much over paint there is not only is the
whole left side over painted but the
whole right side the whole bottom edge
and the whole top edge are over painted
and that has me worried because whenever
I see that much over paint I have a
sneaking suspicion that there may not be
any original paint left and if that's
the case well I'll deal with it it's not
the end of the world
but it's less than ideal and I would
rather not have to repaint that much of
the original painting it presents a
problem for me as a conservator and for
my client who didn't otherwise know that
this was the case so I'll keep my
fingers crossed and hope that there's
something underneath that over paint and
it was just the hand of an inexperienced
person or somebody who got a little
paint happy but it is remarkable the
change in just removing this surface
grime and the old varnish this is a
totally different painting and now of
course I have to deal with those areas
of over paint and so I'm using a gelled
solvent and I'm wearing face protection
and gloves because I don't want to
subject myself to any fumes or any off
gassing and it's important that I'm
wearing a full-face respirator because
my mucous membranes such as my eyes can
absorb the vapors from the solvents and
so just a simple respirator won't cut it
I'm gonna place this solvent on the area
of over paint I'm gonna let it sit and
try to soften up that over paint and
I'll come back with a swab and remove it
to see how effective it was now my hopes
is that this solvent will take
everything off and leave the original
paint but unfortunately that's not the
case this old oil paint is really really
strong it's really really old
and so the gelled solvent can't cut
through it as effectively as I would
like and so what option does that leave
me well it's great thing and anybody
who's watched some of my videos before
probably notices that this is a theme in
conservation that there is a lot of
scraping be it glue over paint or
whatever the case may be we do a lot of
manual
work on painting surfaces to remove
stuff that shouldn't be there and
there's no fast way to go about this you
can't speed it up you can't
industrialize it you have to take it
millimeter by millimeter and slowly work
your way through and in this case I'm
trying to scrape off all of where as
much of this over paint as possible to
reveal what's underneath and the good
thing is that as I'm doing this I'm
starting to realize that there really
isn't damage underneath this old over
paint and that is the original paint is
there there's no reason why this top
coating of oil paint should be there and
removing it reveals the artists original
work and that's the best case scenario
it's not often the case but in in this
situation it's really relieving to know
that there is some original paint there
and that I'm not gonna have to reinvent
this entire painting now I'm not sure if
that's gonna hold true throughout the
entire painting but where it does it at
least lets me know that there's a
possibility that all of this darkened
discolored over paint was just somebody
being sloppy so with as much of that
over paint scraped off as safely
possible and I'll get back to that in a
minute
I'm gonna face the painting with kozo
and a solvent based adhesive and the
reason I'm using a solvent based
adhesive as opposed to a fish gelatin or
another protein based water-based
adhesive is that my initial tests have
revealed that the adhesive used to bond
the canvas to the hardboard is a rabbit
skin glue and that's a water-based
adhesive and so if I do need to expose
that to any moisture I want to make sure
that whatever I used to bond this paper
to the face of the painting won't become
soft or pliable or reactivate it and if
I used a fish gelatin that would be the
case and that would be really
problematic so I'm gonna be using a
scalpel and some palette knives to
slowly pry up and break the glue bond
between the canvas and the hard board
and in this case a
I'm really lucky because this glue has
just completely failed and it is so
dried out and so brittle that it doesn't
take much effort to break that bond and
remove the canvas from the hardboard now
I still want to be careful I don't want
to put any unnecessary stress on the
canvas or the paint layer so I'm gonna
go slowly and I'm gonna use this palette
knife I'm gonna slide it under and twist
it a little bit just to break that glue
joint and as it does as I do I'll slowly
lift up this canvas and remove it from
the cardboard now I could have easily
removed the hard board from the canvas
with a router chisels and planes but
this is a fairly large canvas and hard
board like this is incredibly tough on
your tools and so it chews through
router bits and plain bahama irons
pretty quickly not to mention I made
some tests and I discovered that this
glue joint is actually pretty weak and
so there's not really any pressing
reason to big it to break out the power
tools and go through all of that labor
when I can approach it in a smarter way
so as you can see it's coming off fairly
easily at this point I'm just slowly
lifting the painting off the glue has
completely failed and this canvas is
coming off nice and easily you can see
over there and the right there was a
little spot of light coming through and
I think that's a little tear that had
probably caused this whole painting to
be glued to the hard work
as I come to the end I'm being extra
careful because I don't want this thing
to pop off and fly out of my hands and
end up on the floor and a million little
pieces because well that would be pretty
bad and so now with the canvas remove
from that hard board I can get to
scraping more spraying now I mentioned
that this rabbit skin glue had failed
and that it's just completely brittle
and dried out you can see how easily
it's scraped off with a scalpel and I'm
just gliding the scalpel along the
surface of the canvas I'm really using
almost no pressure and I'm just allowing
the movement of the blade to break up
and lift off this glue layer and I'm
only gonna do this in part of the
painting and only in the parts where the
impasto is relatively minor now this
painting was executed on a very very
fine canvas and there's quite a bit of
texture built up and so if you can
imagine if I press on the back of the
painting with this blade the impasto is
the textural buildup of the paint will
create a bulge on the back side and
those bulges can catch the blade and cut
the canvas so I'm only gonna be using
this scalpel in parts of the painting
where I know it's smooth enough to do so
safely
now the scalpel is a really great
efficient tool to remove this rabbit
skin glue but it's not one that I can
use all the time in some cases where the
canvas is really thin and there's a lot
of impasto I have to use an ultrasonic
scaler yes the same type that your
dentist uses on you even though you beg
them not to now i've dropped the sound
out because these tools make a really
ear piercing sound that nobody wants to
hear maybe your cap but your cat is
crazy and from the last video we learned
just how crazy they can be now the
ultrasonic scaler works by vibrating the
tip of this tool at an ultra-high
frequency and those vibrations will
break up this rabbit skin glue and it
this is a really great tool because the
tip is rounded it's not sharp it doesn't
need a lot of pressure and as long as I
keep it moving it'll break up this glue
really quite well now I have to keep it
moving because those ultrasonic
vibrations can create friction which can
create heat and if I keep it in one
place I can actually burn the canvas and
I definitely don't want to do that now
this is an incredibly slow process as
you can see there's no big tool tip
there's no industrialized machine that
can do this and it's much slower than
the scalpel now I've been using the
scalpel for 20-plus years and so I'm
really confident with it and I have
great control and while it's the tool
that I would prefer to use sometimes
it's just not the right tool and so
having this ultrasonic scaler in my
arsenal allows me another Avenue when my
preferred method is locked out and so as
you can see just gliding it over the
surface breaks up that glue really well
and what we can see when we remove it is
a healthy canvas it's not really much
wrong with it
in fact as I start to brush away all of
this glue that's been removed and
there's quite a lot of it I'm getting
the picture that this canvas really
didn't need to be glued to hard board at
all now sometimes canvas is damaged and
it does need a supports but this is
beautiful canvas and I'm definitely not
gonna glue it to a hard board but before
I can do anything more with the canvas
in terms of its structural support I
need to extract any glue residues and
flatten the canvas and this is done on
the hot table
now this rabbit-skin glue is moisture
sensitive meaning that any exposure to
water or other solvents may soften it
and so I can use that to my advantage to
extract out of the canvas any remaining
residues I can place this painting
face-up on a absorbent cotton blotter
paper that's been dampened with a
release layer I'll wrap the painting
with a cotton webbing and then I'll
create a mylar sandwich on top of the
hot table and extract out the air
I'll bring the painting up to
temperature I'll adjust the pressure to
what I think is going to be appropriate
and then I'll let it do its thing now
there is no universal guideline on how
to do this there's no rulebook or recipe
book that tells you what temperature or
what pressure to use that's all just
learned experience and really so much of
what a conservator does is learned on
the ground not in universities so now
I'm ready to remove the facing and
that's done with the solvent that will
soften up the adhesive that I use I'll
brush it on and then I'll slowly peel it
back and hopefully all of the paint is
still where it should be and none of its
been lost now this painting didn't have
a big flaking issue so I'm not really
all that concerned but it's always nice
to know that no paint has been lost
and it may seem almost unnecessary to
take this step if the painting didn't
have any flaking or its stability wasn't
in question but it's always better to be
safe than to be sorry and this is only a
few dollars worth of material and it
only took 10 or 15 minutes so there
really isn't a reason why I wouldn't do
this step and now I'll remove the excess
adhesive with some cotton balls that
I've rolled up and bundled and I'm just
gliding over the surface picking up the
excess residue and sometimes you just
got to get down to it and use your hands
to rub off that excess adhesive
now while the painting is flat I'm going
to take this opportunity to do something
that's going to pay off later on I'm
going to take a two-part silicone and
I'm going to use it to create an
impression of the paint texture the
impasto although I don't know if I'm
creating an impression or making an
impression I mean I'm not really sure
which one I'm doing one thing sure
however that when it comes to making a
lasting impression a smile and a
handshake just doesn't cut it anymore
I mean everyone's gonna go right to your
website to see what you're really about
and if your websites an old clunker that
doesn't work and doesn't look good well
that's gonna reflect poorly on you and
that's even more important if you're
creative we're showcasing your work is
of paramount importance so go to
Squarespace com where with a few clicks
you can set up a really beautiful online
portfolio where you can pull your images
in from Twitter Foursquare Instagram
Flickr and other sites and if you want
to sell your art online Squarespace has
an e-commerce platform that supports the
way you do business so head over to
Squarespace comm for a free trial and
when you're ready to launch go to
squarespace.com slash Baumgartner to
save 10% off your first purchase of a
website or domain and leave an
impression
that's as awesome as you are all right
websites have been built impressions
have been left everything is hunky-dory
and says I peel back this silicone we
can see that I've now created a kind of
a texture map of the artists original
brushwork and that's really great
because there are places on this
painting where the artists original
paint has been lost and will need to be
filled in and there are plenty of ways
that I can create texture that would
otherwise disguise and blend in and the
naked eye wouldn't see it but if I have
the opportunity to use the artist's
actual brushwork why not I mean yes it
may not be what was here originally and
we'll never know but it's better than me
just guessing so I can add some release
powder onto this fill in medium which is
just gonna facilitate the medium not
sticking to the silicon and I can press
this silicone mold into it and if
everything works and fingers crossed
when I peel it up I should have a
textural impression from another part of
the painting reflecting the artists own
brushwork and now I can turn my
attention to the structural issues with
the painting and luckily those are very
few there's just a small tear and the
issue of the missing tacking edges now
for this tear I would normally use
bridging which is my preferred method
for addressing tears but because this
canvas is really really really thin I
don't want to add the bridging material
onto the back because I'm concerned that
it might Telegraph to the front so I'm
using an adhesive film and then I'm
gonna be using a piece of silk organza
just to hold this little separation
together and there's a lot of old oil
paint that's inside that little tear
inside the gap that I wasn't able to
remove safely so that tear isn't going
to open up and this is really just a
precautionary measure to hold it flat
and to make sure that if the canvas
moves expands and contracts during
humidity changes that this doesn't open
up and fit and manifests itself on the
front so I'll use some heat and I'll
activate the adhesive and then it dries
really quickly I can just press it with
my fingers and
there we go that's all stabilized now
this painting had its original tacking
edges cut off when they glued it to the
hard board my guess is that they just
sliced them right off and said we don't
need these well I need them because I'm
gonna be putting this painting back onto
a stretcher and so I'm gonna be using
Belgium linen and I'm also gonna be
using silk organza no you may ask why am
i using both when I could just be using
the Belgian linen to add a tacking edge
well this canvas is very very thin and
I'm concerned that the Belgian linen
which is probably twice the thickness of
this canvas is going to leave an
impression on the front in addition the
edges of this painting are pretty weak
that's where the paint has been lost and
I suspect there may have been some water
damage in the past so I'm using this
silk organza and the adhesive film to
reinforce about an inch and a half along
the tacking edge area and this is done
just so that I have a little bit more
fidelity in this part of the canvas
before I add the tacking edge now the
tacking edge will pull on the canvas
when I stretch it and I want to make
sure that it's pulling on the strongest
part that if I don't want to adhere it
to a week in canvas and then put some
tension on it and have the canvas tear
so by doing this double method I can
ensure that when this linen is pulled
taut its pulling on the silk organza
which is distributing that tension
across a larger surface area than just
the linen itself it seems overkill it
seems are done in but again better safe
than sorry and before I go to stretch
the painting I'm going to take advantage
of it being flat on the table to remove
any of the excess fill in material and
you remember that when I fill in any
areas of losses I over fill because it's
fast it's efficient and because I can
remove the excess later on but that's
really an important step because
anywhere that there's the original paint
and
keep the original paint and I don't want
it to be covered up with retouching
medium or with fill-in so I'll take a
swab that's moistened with solvent and
water and I will expose the fill and
medium to that and just lift it up now
because this painting didn't have a
stretcher I had to have one custom-made
and this is a stretcher that's made of
sugar pine which is a fast growing
straight grain pine that's sustainably
harvested and as important because I'd
like to be a good steward of the
environment as best I can and also
because it's fast growing and straight
grained it has an even moisture content
and when it's kiln dried it stays very
straight I don't want a stretcher that's
gonna twist and turn and distort and so
I'll take the painting I'll place it on
the stretcher I'll square it up I'll
figure out where it needs to go and then
I'll start tacking it and I always start
tacking from the center out because it
affords me the opportunity to create a
triangle or daimond of tension in the
middle of the painting and then to
remove any excess slack to the corners
where it's much much more easily managed
now there's a plenty debate about what's
the right way to stretch and the wrong
way to stretch and you know that's kind
of up to the individual who's doing the
stretching and this is the way that I
prefer to do it because this is the way
that I feel I get the best results other
people may have different perspectives
and that's certainly okay there's not
one right way to skin a cat so using my
magnetic hammer and sterilized steel
upholstery tacks I'll just drive them in
using the pulling pliers to create even
tension and make sure that this painting
is well secured to the stretcher and
when I'm done doing that I will take
care of the excess canvas on the back
I'm using smaller tacks
I'll fold the canvas under and tack it
along the back of the stretcher just to
make sure that it's nice and tidy and
again this doesn't really add much
structural support although there is an
argument
to be made that any more tax will help
distribute the pressure of attention it
looks good and I like that now before I
do any retouching I'm going to apply a
layer of synthetic resin and often I
call this an isolation layer but it's
not really to isolate anything because I
used this same resin in my retouching
paints and it's all fully reversible so
it's not really designed to isolate
sometimes I'll use this to simulate what
the painting will look like after final
varnish is applied so that I can make
sure my colors match but in this case
because there is so much film and
material so many areas of retouching I
want to make sure that they don't absorb
the retouching paint too much and that
is dry draw out any of those resins and
create an overly matte or overly glossy
area so that resin layer helps unify the
base for the retouching now I'm going to
be doing a little bit different than I
normally do I'm starting off with a big
old brush normally you see me start off
with a very very tiny brush and use lots
of little brush strokes and little dots
to reintegrate the losses but here I'm
going big I brought out the big guns and
frankly that's just because there's a
lot of area to retouch and it wouldn't
necessarily make sense to start off with
a very small brush now I know you're
thinking that I'm gonna lose some
precision and I'm gonna be sloppy well
I'm actually going to not go all the way
to the edge I'm gonna leave a little
border of unretouched area when I come
up to some of the original paint and
really what I'm doing here is just
trying to lay down some base color
efficiently and quickly so that I can
get to that smaller brush and the reason
that I leave that area when I come up
next to some of the original is because
as I get closer and closer to matching
the colors it's gonna get harder and
harder to see where I've retouched and
where is original and so if I leave this
little border I'll know what's my work
and what's the artists original work
and this is a fairly easy area to
retouch because it's really loosely
painted and I can go about it pretty
loosely it's not an area of great detail
and it isn't a terribly complex series
of colors to mix in fact this is one of
those odd cases where I have to be a
little bit looser and consciously try to
be less controlling because it achieves
an effect that better blends into the
original painting and once I'm satisfied
with the base color that I've laid down
I'll switch to a smaller brush and I'll
start to fill in that little gap that I
left between the retouching and the
original paint and as you can see once I
start do that it blends in pretty well
and it disappears pretty quickly now
I'll still come back to this later on
after I've had a little time away from
it and take a second pass and just make
sure that I'm satisfied with the colors
with the brushstrokes and just with how
everything is reintegrating but not bad
for a first shot and maybe twenty-five
thirty minutes worth of retouching now
again this is a pretty easy area to
retouch it's not all that complicated
and like I said it actually took some
discipline to be a little bit looser and
to be a little bit more freewheeling
here which is something that has a
conservator you generally don't get to
do all that often so it's a nice change
of pace but ultimately the goal is the
same to make the damage disappear to
reunify the image so that we can
appreciate it as a whole and not see the
damage and not have it disturb our
ability to enjoy the painting as the
artist wanted us to appreciate it and
there are lots of areas throughout the
painting that are going to require this
same treatment pretty much all along the
edges where there was massive paint
losses and I would film those and show
you them but we're already at 30 some
odd minutes and hopefully some of you
are still awake and I fear that if I
continue just to show retouching you
won't be and so I can start to move on
to other areas of the painting that are
a little bit more tricky and
one of those areas is the signature now
we can see that there has been some loss
and then around and on the signature and
I know the artist is Henry Ranger now I
can't quite make out what this signature
set says I don't know if it says Ranger
or Henry or HR Ranger or whatever the
case may be and it's not really up to me
to determine that the problem here is
that there are losses throughout the
signature and I have to make a decision
about what I'm going to retouch and how
that's going to be balanced ethically so
one thing that I will not do is
reinforce enhance or complete this
signature and the reason that I don't do
that is because when this painting is
black let all of my work all of my
retouching will glow and I don't want to
create a situation whereby a prospective
client looks at this painting and says
wait a minute why is the signature
fluorescing what's going on here is this
an authentic painting any time the
signature fluoresce is it instantly
casts doubt about the authenticity of
the painting even if it's an authentic
painting it raises that question and
that complicates the equation for an
auction house for a dealer for a
gallerist even for a private client
looking to sell the painting and one of
my responsibilities to my clients aside
from making their paintings stable and
making them look like the artist wanted
is to not do anything that would
complicate the existence of the painting
in the future and whether that be at a
sale whether that be at a submission for
a catalog resume whatever and so by
filling in that signature that would be
a problem so I'm just going to disguise
this damage away so that we can't really
even see it and then I'm gonna leave the
signature alone and so with all of my
retouching completed it's on to
varnishing and for this painting I'm
gonna be applying the varnish using an
HVLP system a spray system and I'm doing
that because I want to get a satin
effect and I think I can achieve that
better for this painting by spraying it
rather than brushing
and that's just again something that you
learned by doing this thousands of times
you kind of get a sense of what type of
varnish and what type of application is
going to work best for any given
painting so once I have achieved good
coverage we can take a look at the
painting as it came into the studio
really brown and yellow a ton of surface
grime a ton of over painting all over
the edges and kind of a lousy looking
painting but with all of that surface
grime all that old varnish all that over
painting removed the losses reintegrated
is it pretty stunning painting and one
that much more accurately reflects what
Henry Ranger wanted us to see thanks for
watching go ahead and subscribe and stay
tuned for more